 For China, Migrant Crisis Is Someone Else’s Fault, and Responsibility 



Earlier this year, as war-dazed Syrians fled to Europe and the Rohingya ran from murder in Myanmar, European diplomats suggested to their Chinese counterparts it might be good to talk about migration. There was a perfect opportunity: the 17th E.U.-China Summit in Brussels in June.
The Chinese demurred and suggested instead talking about the safer topic of disability, said a European diplomat familiar with the situation who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
The message: China is reluctant to get involved in efforts to solve humanitarian crises that it believes are not of its own making.
Money tells the same, hands-off, story.
Since 2012, China has contributed $14 million in humanitarian aid to help solve ‘‘civil unrest’’ in Syria, about 0.1 percent of the $14 billion donated by countries and organizations around the world, according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. That puts the world’s second-largest economy, with the world’s biggest currency reserves, in 32nd place, behind Japan (ninth, having contributed $445 million with $24 million more pledged).
Although China sent ships to evacuate its own citizens caught up in the fighting in Libya in 2011 and this year in Yemen, it believes the migrant crisis sweeping Europe is mostly the fault, and responsibility, of the United States and Europe, for trying to foment political change in countries such as Syria and Libya.
‘‘A part is due to a minority of so-called ‘democrats’ in those countries, who are determined to subvert stable authoritarian rule there,’’ Tian Wenlin, a scholar at the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations, wrote in People’s Daily.
‘‘The main reason, however, is that the United States and Europe took the opportunity to carry out ‘regime change,’’’ Mr. Tian wrote
‘‘In truth, the U.S. and Europe’s tyrannical foreign policy is both frightening and stupid,’’ he continued. ‘‘It has caused massive disasters in western Asia and northern Africa that are now boomeranging on Europe and the U.S.’’
But China does have responsibilities, as a party to both United Nations’ refugee agreements, the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol. There are a quarter of a million Chinese refugees and asylum seekers around the world, while about 300,000 people from other countries are refugees in China, according to the U.N.H.C.R., the United Nations’ refugee agency.
Asked if China had received requests from governments or organizations to assist with the migrant crisis in the Middle East and Europe, the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs didn’t answer directly, saying instead, ‘‘China has noted the recent immigration issue.’’
‘‘Appropriately settling the immigration issue is related to the economic development, social stability and integration process in Europe,’’ the ministry statement said. ‘‘Striking a blow against illegal immigration activities and resolving humanitarian crises is the common wish of international society.’’
‘‘Immigration questions are complicated and sensitive. Their roots lie in uneven development and regional instability,’’ it added. ‘‘We believe Europe and relevant countries can unite and respond to this major challenge and appropriately solve related issues to maintain regional security and stability.’’
In any case, the chatter on social media suggests that many Chinese oppose taking in Syrians, who make up 53 percent of the thousands fleeing to Europe.
Another 14 percent are from Afghanistan, while 7 percent are from Eritrea and most of the rest from other African countries, according to the U.N.H.C.R.
So far Chinese are ‘‘overwhelmingly against the idea, saying China is not responsible for turbulence in the Middle East, many Chinese people are still living in poverty and that the refugees won’t want to come to China anyway,’’ the Hong Kong Free Press reported.
But some disagreed. One poster, frankkee, on the popular Tianya forum noted that China and Israel’s friendship began over the safe haven China offered to Jews fleeing Hitler, and much of America’s talent came from its millions of refugees from Europe. ‘‘Taking in some refugees from the Middle East,’’ wrote frankkee, “will certainly do more good than harm.’’
